250123

Thinking about my website:

Got the site repo setup on gitub and the jklynk.com domain ported over (wich took a decent bit of finagling, i’m not very up on DNS)

Decided to use github because it’s free for basic pages (including custom domain), and makes it easier to push changes from my computer, mostly these dailies

Spent a good chunk of the day just creating works pages and porting all that stuff over from the old site

All-in-all, i really like this idea and how it’s looking so far. I feel way better about this site than my old site.

* * *

Thinking about generative art:

Finished a reading on generative art by philip gallanter. he covers: what generative art is (and is not), some gen art communities and history, the concept of effective complexity for gen art, problems in gen art theory (authorship, intent, uniqueness, authenticity, meaning, creativity, etc..), and the future of gen art (synthetic biology, bio-art, self-assembling material, swarm intelligence).

I’m interested in generative art, but I think I’ve ruled it out as much subject of research.

* * *

Thinking about game design:

Taking a break from reading and watching some youtube instead (which I’ve always much preferred anyways). Discovered The Game Overanalyzer. Wow. Stuff to really make you think.

Got me thinking about focusing my research on interactive digital art, and maybe tying in some game design theory, as a means of exploring critical theory (I forgot that’s the term for what I’m interested in, lol)

* * *

Thinking about power structures:

Had to write a short critique on the introduction chapter to Weapons of Mass Destruction by Cathy O’Neil. I felt she didn’t look deep enough at the root of the problem: the powers of structure in society that shape technology. I used Deleuze’s Postscript on Societies of Control as my basis. I like Deleuze’s Postscript. I also threw in a quote from CrimethInc for good measure.